== About ==

FreeSpeech is a realtime speech recognition application for the 
desktop (Android soon, hopefully). Offline speaker-independent voice 
recognition with dynamic language learning capability using the 
[http://cmusphinx.sourceforge.net/ pocketsphinx] back-end. 
Essentially, FreeSpeech is a "front-end" for pocketsphinx with 
additional learning ability and automation. It automatically manages 
the difficult process of 
[http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/SLM/toolkit_documentation.html 
creating language models].

== Requirements ==

The following development packages should be installed.

  * [http://www.python.org/ Python 2.7] * [http://www.pygtk.org/ 
  pygtk2] * [http://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/ gstreamer, including 
  gstreamer-python] * [http://cmusphinx.sourceforge.net/ 
  pocketsphinx] * 
  [http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/SLM/CMU-Cam_Toolkit_v2.tar.gz 
  CMU-Cambridge Statistical Language Modeling Toolkit v2]

== Using FreeSpeech ==

There is no desktop icon yet. Right-click on the desktop to create one.
Launching the program may be done via the Python interpreter.

    python freespeech.py

Position the microphone somewhere near your face and begin talking. 
To end of the sentence, say "period" (or "colon", "question-mark", 
"exclamation-point") Look at the dictionary, "custom.dic" for ideas.

Voice commands are included. For the most updated information about 
this, take a look at the source. Some voice commands at the time of 
this writing include:

  * file quit - quits the program
  * file preferences - pops up a dialog (not very useful yet)
  * editor clear - clears all text in the editor and starts over
    
== Troubleshooting ==

Make sure the various requirements work. For example, "pocketsphinx" 
itself, which may be run from the command line.

== Improving accuracy  ==

The biggest improvements in accuracy have been achieved by adjusting 
the microphone position. The volume level is adjusted automatically 
and tweaking it is not likely to improve much. You may try making a 
recording with [http://audacity.sourceforge.net Audacity] and 
checking the noise levels to make sure it sounds like intelligible 
speech when played back.

The rlanguage corpus that ships with this download, 
"freespeech.ref.txt" is likely to be very limited. Our excuse is 
that the small size will save memory while providing room to learn 
your spoken grammar. Don't be surprised if it does not work very 
well for you at first. Use the keyboard to manually edit the text in 
the box until it says what you intended to say. Then hit the "Learn" 
button. It will try to do better at understanding you next time!

Don't worry if you inadvertently teach it bad grammar. It's not 
strictly necessary, but the file, "freespeech.ref.txt" may be 
manually corrected if it develops bad speech habits. Changes will 
apply next time you hit the "Learn" button.

The language model may be further 
[http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/SLM/toolkit_documentation.html#evallm 
tweaked and improved].

If there is a word that stubbornly refuses to recognize, even 
after using it in several sentences, you may need to edit the 
dictionary: "freespeech.dic" This dictionary is based on 
Pocketsphinx's cmu07a.dic because it contains punctuation (Can you 
say "period"?) and some capitalized words. Adding new words to the 
dictionary may be done manually, along with their phonetic 
representation, but we are working on incorporating a word trainer.

Adapt pocketsphinx to your voice for better accuracy.
See http://cmusphinx.sourceforge.net/wiki/tutorialadapt

Security and privacy

Learned speech patterns are stored in "plain text" format in 
"lm/freespeech.ref.txt". You probably do not want to teach 
FreeSpeech sensitive or private information like passwords, 
especially if other people will have access to your PC. That said, 
it is very handy to use voice passwords on non-secure sites, and 
such. Not recommended for banking and payroll. 
